Arabica and Robusta: The Two Most Cultivated Coffee Bean Species

What is Arabica and Robusta Coffee
Robusta coffee bean is a species coming from the Coffea canephora plant. Its production amounts to around 30% of the world's total production, which makes it the second most popular variety. Its typical features are a strong and harsh, yet deep flavor, given by a high caffeine content. These are the characteristics for which it is considered very suitable for instant coffee, since Robusta is mostly used for instant coffee granules and powders.

Arabica is undoubtedly the most widely produced species of bean. It was originally discovered in the high-altitude forests of Ethiopia, where it was cultivated and harvested to brew hot beverages in the 12th century. This species derives from the Coffea Arabica plant and is more appreciated and favored than Robusta by coffee connoisseurs. The nuanced, aromatic, and sweeter mouth feel plays a significant part in the bean's popularity. While having a lower caffeine content, Arabica beans account for about 70% of the market and are higher in quality and more expensive to purchase.

The Main Differences
Arabica coffee beans are generally ovular, flat and oilier than robusta. That's why they taste sweeter, zesty and somewhat fruity. Robusta coffee beans tend to be slightly smaller and rounder. Their harsh, bitter taste is due to the fewer oils they hold, while usually having a more natural and earthy flavor.

Caffeine is more concentrated in Robusta than in Arabica. Robusta beans have 2.7% caffeine content, while Arabica holds almost less than half of it, at 1.5%. Arabica contains almost twice the concentration of sugar and about 60% more lipids than Robusta.

Robusta is an extremely hardy plant. It is much easier to tend to, growing in a variety of different environments, and generally has a higher yield. It is less likely to be affected by insects because of the higher amount of caffeine, which works as a chemical defence for the coffee seeds as it is toxic to bugs.

A third species of coffee that is commercially farmed, making up about 2-3% of the global coffee trade, is known as Liberica. Its flavour can be described as fruity, unusual and peculiarly intense, thanks to a low acidity and a less bitter aroma, granting a strong and resolute aftertaste.

Which One to Choose
The right answer is to be found in your own preferences and taste. Most coffee enthusiasts agree on Arabica coffee as the most prestigious one, thanks to its sweeter and softer tones and its frequent fruity and chocolate notes. Beans from Robusta plants, while being more bitter, do have their own place in the heart of coffee lovers. You could also go for an Arabica and Robusta blend.
