Brazil Coffee Overview

Brazil is the largest producer of arabica coffee and not a small amount of robusta too. Brazilian coffee is nutty, sweet, low in acidity and develops exceptional bittersweet and chocolate roast tastes. There's a long tradition of roasting Brazil in the United States. Brazil is roasted and sold as a single-origin coffee — by region, cooperative or Fazenda — but it is often used in blends for the sake of cost control.

Brazil coffees are common in espresso, both in high-end blends and in commercial coffees. Even the broken fragments of beans and the dust from the dry mills is sold, ending up in some product somewhere, most likely instant. But there is quality coffee in Brazil, it just takes some good relationships and cupping work to find.

Flavor Profiles
There's a big push on behalf of Brazilian coffee growing associations to create the image of their coffees as a distinct flavor profile, but there just isn't the extreme distinction that identifies one Brazilian coffee from another. Attention to good farming and processing techniques has helped, but the coffee is grown at lower altitudes than most Specialty coffee, in poor quality soils, in open areas that were often originally grassland (a reason why the "shade-grown" criteria really doesn't apply much to Brazil).

Complex Issues
Every origin with the capability to produce good coffee can produce horrible coffee as well. Farms side-by-side can produce differing qualities of coffee, and within a single farm or cooperative there is a full spectrum of coffee cup quality. The real question to ask is whether each lot tastes good, where a "lot" means one batch of coffee processed through the mill. That question is answered in comparative cupping of the coffees for taste quality.

As far as Brazil goes, the issues are complex. Brazil produces relatively few containers of coffee that truly cup from 84-87 points, and a staggering quantity of coffee that cups below 80 points, commercial-grade coffee. Coffees that are truly 88+ points are rare from Brazil, given the varietals and bean density. Relative to other Brazils and the classic flavor profile of these lower grown, soft coffees, they can go higher, but on a global scale a Brazil is unlikely to reach the ranges of the best Ethiopia, Kenya, Colombia or Guatemala wet-processed coffees.

Then again, Brazil coffees are solid, crowd-pleasing coffees with outstanding body, and nut-to-chocolate roast tones. They also appeal to the palate that finds acidity — the flavorful brightness in better coffees — somehow annoying. And nothing touches a really good Brazil coffee as a base in espresso blends, for the ease with which they produce good physical characteristics (mouthfeel and crema) as well as nice base flavor.

Brazil coffee farming regions include Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Mogiana, Cerrado, Parana, Bahia Cerrado, Chapada de Minas, Patrocinio, Varginha, and Sao Paolo.

Not Complex Coffee
Brazils are not complex coffees, and don't have impressive acidity that adds a vivid brightness to coffees from higher-grown areas of Guatemala or Ethiopia. But Brazils are a different sort of beast. Brazils are not dense coffee seeds: they are grown at lower altitudes than Central American coffees. Hence the very dark roasts of Brazil coffees pick up ashy, bittering flavors. For espresso, you can roast Brazils lighter, separately, or keep the entire blend at a Vienna roast or lighter.

Processing
There are 3 methods of processing Brazil coffees of interest: Dry-Process (Natural), Pulped Natural, and Semi-Washed. They produce different types of cups. The Natural has great body, chocolate, possibly fruity notes, and it risks being earthier and more rustic in the cup. The Pulped Natural is created when the coffee cherry skin is removed and the parchment, with much of the mucilage attached, is sun-dried on patio or raised drying bed; it cups more like Natural coffee, but is a bit cleaner in the cup. The Semi-Washed uses a demucilager machine to remove the skin and the mucilage, and ranges in character from being close to Pulped Natural in flavor profile, to being similar to a wet-processed coffee (clean cup, uniform, less body, less chocolate, a bit brighter).

Good naturals and pulped naturals (called cereja descascada in Brazil) have more intensity and produce more crema, but must be cupped rigorously to watch for defective cup character. Really clean Semi-Washed coffees, where a lot of the mucilage is removed, do not have typical Brazil character; they score higher and dominate the Cup of Excellence competition, but for a cleaner, brighter cup the standard is set elsewhere.

Roasting
Brazils prefer a lower initial roast temperature and can turn quite ashy tasting when roasted too dark. Brazils for espresso benefit from being rested a while after roasting. Most quality Brazil comes from the Sul de Minas: Carmo de Minas, Cerrado and Matas de Minas. Cerrado is a savanna-like area, dry and flat, in Minas Gerais state, producing a lot of coffee with some good un-blended single farm lots.

Note on "Santos": Santos is a port, not a producing region. Coffee labeled Santos is pooled from market-grade lots and the lowest common denominator expresses itself as the primary cup character.
