Kenya Coffee Overview

Kenya is a powerhouse of the coffee world, known for the intensity of its bright acidity and complex flavors. The quality of the top coffee lots has been rewarded with high prices in the weekly Kenya auction in Nairobi. In a sense Kenya was (and is) the first coffee-producing nation that had a transparent system where coffee quality and prices have been linked.

The problem in Kenya is that, for the farmer, producing that top-quality coffee is expensive. Kenya coffee requires constant care, year-round focus, expensive inputs, and lots of labor. So whether the farm gate price truly rewards the farmer has been a matter of debate. But the laws have adapted to allow buyers to directly purchase coffees, bypassing the auction if they can pay a better price, and this has opened up a new window on quality in Kenya.

Broadly speaking, the best Kenya coffees are complex and bright, and light up the palate from front to back. It is not for people who do not like acidity in coffee (acidity being the prized, flavorful bright notes in the cup; think citrus, black currant, and berry). A great Kenya balances brightness with sweet flavors, syrups and cane sugar, spice notes, and fruited aspects that sometimes tend toward winey.

Kenya Coffee Quality and Unique Wet-Processing System
When looking for the reasons Kenya has such unique coffee, it's good to focus on the Kenyan wet-process method, which is different than other places. In Kenya, they use long fermentation times, and an additional soaking process afterwards.

Coffee from the day's harvest comes in at evening time, then it is sorted at the mill for any under-ripe or Coffee Berry Borer-bitten cherries. Coffee is logged in by the mill to ensure proper payment to the farmer, then collected in cement bins and run through the pulper/grader, which removes skins from the fruit and does some basic separation of the heavier (riper) cherry from lighter (floating) underripe ones. This results in 3 different streams of graded coffee seeds, washed down cement channels into separate tanks. Coffee is left overnight in the initial tank, then washed down into a lower series of tanks for more fermentation, lasting as long as 36 hours (in Central America, coffee is rarely fermented more than 24 hours total).

Water is changed in the tank every 12 hours, using filtered, recycled water which maintains the fermentation reactions. After this the coffee is sent to the washing channel, where the fruity mucilage layer is easily scrubbed off. Then it goes to a soaking tank, held in clean water for 12 hours (up to 48 hours if drying beds are full). The coffee is then washed down channels to the triage point, dumped onto a large screen, and transported to the raised drying screens. The key difference is the extraordinarily long fermentation time — and yet the resulting coffee usually has one of the brightest, cleanest cup profiles in the world.

The Challenges in Kenya
Currently, the Kenya auction system and coffee production is suffering many problems, as is all of East Africa. For now the coffees are still of high quality, but if the auction system does not continue to serve and benefit the small farmer co-ops, they will plant other crops instead, or replace the better cultivars (the excellent SL-28 and SL-34 selections) with the disease-resistant but poor quality Ruiru 11 strain. There have been political controversies, with localities taking control of the coffee sector, underscoring that the system is in need of greater transparency at all levels.

Regions
Kenya coffee farming regions include Nyeri, Kirinyaga, Meru, Thika, Kiambu, Muranga, Nakuru, Kisii, Bungoma, Trans Nzoia, Mount Elgon, Embu, and Mount Kenya.

Historical Note
Coffee was introduced into Kenya by way of Reunion (Bourbon) island at the end of the 19th century (1893 is sometimes given as the date). It was brought for local cultivation by the Fathers of the Holy Spirit congregation in 1911. Harvest times: Main Crop October-December, Fly Crop June-August in some zones only. Primary cultivars: SL-28, SL-34, Kents K-7, Ruiru 11, Batian. Bourbons are sometimes called "Scottish Mission" and "French Mission," but that is mostly a marketing term.

Coffee Varieties and Plant Diseases
SL-28 is the king of all varietals and is broadly planted at high altitude farms. SL-34 and K-7 can be found in some higher zones too. SL stands for Scott Laboratories, contracted by the government to improve upon the Bourbon types brought by French Missionaries from Reunion (Bourbon) island via Tanzania, as well as Yemen Typica seedstock from the Scottish Mission in the North.

Coffee Leaf Rust (CLR) and Coffee Berry Disease (CBD) are huge problems in Kenya, and without treatment the crops would be devastated. Organic Kenya coffee is not viable. While the SL types have some resistance, the Coffee Research center in Ruiru developed Ruiru 11 in the 1980s — a back-crossed hybrid with Hibrido de Timor inputs that is hearty and strong, but tastes different than the SL types. A newer hybrid, Batian, is making inroads but still does not have the cup taste of the treasured SL coffees. Most co-ops and farms are aware that buyers want the SL types. Kenya coffee trees have typically been treated with fungicides at some point — in this way it is 180 degrees opposite of Ethiopia.

It takes a lot of work to sort through the many samples to find the few that are truly complex — the coffees that provide a real "experience," not just a pleasant cup.
