Sumatra Coffee Overview

Sumatran coffee has flavors people love or hate. Sumatra coffees are famous for their peculiar flavor profile, low acidity, thick body, and rustic flavors that can often be described as earthy. The base level flavors, pungency of the roast, and low acidity are draws for those who fall for the Sumatra flavor profile. Much of the flavor comes from the way Sumatras are processed, the wet-hull method, not to be confused with wet-processed coffee.

The flavor of typical wet-hull Sumatra is polarizing among buyers in the coffee trade. Some love it, but they must bracket this type of flavor profile because it would be considered unacceptable from any other origin besides Indonesia. Each coffee drinker has to discover if this type of flavor is right for them, or not: whether it's a go-to daily drinker, an occasional diversion, or flat-out unacceptable.

Coffee Schizophrenia
On a cupping table of well-processed Central American coffees, a Sumatra would immediately be thrown out as defective. The earthy and "foresty" flavors — herbal, sometimes mossy or even mushroomy — would be attributed to processing errors, and the coffee labeled as flat-out bad. But if a Sumatra supplier can consistently provide the same coffee, processed the same way, be it fruity or earthy, there are buyers who see this as a uniquely different flavor profile, and a welcome break from the Central America, Colombia or Kenya coffees. Those who like minimally-processed wines, or those wines with complex flavors of leather, peat moss, fir, cedar, humus, tannins, will see something in the Sumatra flavor profile.

Giling Basah — Wet-Hulled Processing (not the same as Wet-Process Coffee)
Indonesian coffees like Sumatra are nearly always processed by the wet-hull method. Wet-hulled coffee is called Giling Basah in Bahasa. Most coffee in Indonesia is grown on small-holder farms. They pick the coffee and pulp it (running it through a hand-crank drum that peels off the skin of the fruit), then ferment the coffee — in a polypropylene bag, plastic tub, or concrete tank — to break down the fruit layer (mucilage). After overnight fermentation, the mucilage is washed off, leaving wet parchment coffee still swollen with water.

In Sumatra, the farmer doesn't want to wait — they want to get paid. So they take their clean wet parchment coffee, dry it a few hours until it has about 50% moisture content, and sell it to a collector middleman or deliver it to a mill. The mill sends it to a wet-huller while the coffee still has 25-35% moisture content. This machine uses friction to tear the tightly-attached parchment layer from the water-swollen green bean, which at this stage is often white. Then the coffee is laid out to dry, totally unprotected by any outer layer, on a patio, tarp, road, or sometimes dirt. Drying without the shell is rapid.

What does this do to the coffee? It creates a lower-acid cup, less brightness, and seems to enhance body. But the risk is great: the wet and unprotected green bean can easily be damaged in the hulling or on the drying patio. That said, there is good vs. bad wet-hulled coffee — some mills dry coffee on immaculate patios under greenhouse-like structures, treating the coffee with great respect and consistently producing great lots.

Selecting Sumatran Coffee
We look for sweetness in the cup — an expanded definition of sweetness: raw sugar like muscovado, molasses, or unique syrups like brown rice or sorghum syrup. A coffee with no sweetness is rarely a good coffee. We look at the rustic elements to distinguish gross flavors like dirt from positive clean-earth, humus or other relatively clean natural scents and tastes. Slight green herb and mossy notes are good, but vegetal notes that are too bittering hint at poor processing or under-ripe fruits.

History and Regions
Arabica production in Sumatra began in the 18th century under Dutch colonial domination, introduced first to the northern region of Aceh around Lake Tawar. Coffee is still widely produced in the northern regions of Aceh (Takengon, Bener Mariah) as well as in the Lake Toba region (Lintong Nihuta, Dairi-Sidikalang, Siborongborong, Dolok Sanggul, and Seribu Dolok) to the southwest of Medan. Sumatras are sold as Mandheling (Mandailing), which is simply the Indonesian ethnic group once involved in coffee production; the coffee is scored by defects in the cup, not physical defects of the green coffee.

Varieties
Sumatra has a range of cultivars. The original Typica type was brought from Yemen or Ethiopia via India (sometimes called Jember Typica), with two main types: Bergandal and Sidikalang. Hibrido de Timor, a cross between arabica and robusta, is sometimes found as "TimTim." The majority of coffees are arabica types that have robusta inputs, like the Catimor coffees found in Central America. Knowing the specific cultivar is nearly impossible, and they are often a mix of many. All of this is really second fiddle to the process flavors — the wet-hull Giling Basah method trumps all in the Sumatra cup.

Pests
The most damage to the crop comes from CBB — the Coffee Berry Borer (Broca) — which runs rampant in most areas of Sumatra. The small beetle drills into the fruit and seed while it is on the tree, and damaged beans must be sorted out before export. One of the best prevention methods is to pick coffee promptly when mature and not let coffee fall to the ground, but Sumatra has a poorly defined crop cycle, so the shrub often has ripe fruit on it.

Roasting Sumatra
There is a tendency to over-roast Indonesians, because they don't show as much roast color and have a mottled appearance up until 2nd crack. Don't let this make you think you have to roast them dark. Great Indonesians will be wonderful roasted just to the verge of 2nd crack but NOT into it at all. We buy very selectively from Sumatra and cup our lots hard, finding great Sumatras in both the traditional rustic flavor category and cleaner, well-processed types.
